---
tags:
  - vim
title: vim101
slug: "1581067566"
author: byodian
pubDatetime: 2022-03-18T03:16:32Z
modDatetime: 2024-01-22T12:45:31Z
featured: false
---

## 普通模式
### 复制

- `y`
- `dd`
- `gU`
- `gu`
- `x`
- `X`

### 缩进

`>` , `<` 或 `=`

- `4==` indent current line and next 3
- `=ap` indent around paragraph
- `=%` indent to end of method

### 重复操作

- `.` 小数点可以重复上一次的命令
- `N<command>` 重复某个命令 N 次

### 移动

- `%` 匹配括号移动，包括`[` `{` `(` ,需要将光标移动到括号上。
- `#`，`*` 匹配光标所在单词，`*` 下一个， `#` 上一个
- `0` 行头
- `^` 本行的第一个非空白字符
- `$` 到行尾
- `g_` 到本行最后一个非空白字符
- `fa` 向前移动到查找的第一个 a 字符
- `t,` 移动到逗号前的第一个字符
- `3fa` 当前行查找第三个出现的字母 a
- `dt"` 删除查找到的第一个双引号之前的所有的内容
- `w` 下一个单词到开头
- `e` 下一个单词的结尾

单词默认由字母、数字和下划线组成（程序变量），而使用大写 `W`、`E` 的移动方式，单词由空白字符分隔。

### action + text object
**action**

- `d` delete
- `y` yank
- `v` visual
- `c` delete and insert
- `s` same as `cl`
- `S` same as `cc`

**text object**

- `w` word
- `s` sentence
- `p` paragraph
- `'`  `"` `}` `]` `)` specific characters

字符串（map (+) ("foo"))，光标在第一个 o 的位置

- `vi"` select foo
- `va"` select  “foo”
- `vi)` select "foo"
- `va)` select ("foo")
- `v2i)` select map (+) ("foo")
- `v2a)` select (map (+) ("foo")

## Scrolling relative to cursor

- `:help scrolling`
- `zt` - reposition viewport so your current line is at the top
- `zz` - middle
- `zb` - bottom
- `<c-y>`
- `<c-e>`
- `<c-u>`
- `<c-d>`
- `<c-f>`
- `<c-b>`

## 缓存
当使用 vim 编辑器时，vim 会在被编辑的文件目录下，建立一个名为 `.filename.swap` 的文件

## buffers

```markdown
Summary:
- A buffer is the in-memory text of a file.
- A window is a viewport on a buffer.
    - A tab page is a collection of windows.
```

- `:ls` 查看缓冲区被打开的文件，%a 表示当前文件，相关标记如下：
- `-` 非活动的缓冲区
- `a` 当前被激活缓冲区
- `h` 隐藏的缓冲区
- `%` 当前的缓冲区
- `#` 交换缓冲区
- `=` 只读缓冲区
- `+` 已经更改的缓冲区
- `:buffer` [数字编号] 切换文件

### 同 buffer

- `:n` 编辑下一个文件
- `:N` 编辑上一个文件
- `:files` 列出目前这个 vim 开启的所有文件，同 `:ls`
- `:n` and `:N`doesn't switch between buffers

### 不同 buffers

- `:bn` 编辑下一个文件(`:bnext`)
- `:bp` 编辑上一个文件(`:bprevious`)
- `:blast` 缩写 `:bl`
- `:bfirst` 缩写 `:bf`

### 删除 buffer

- `:%bd` - delete all your buffers
- `:bd` or `:.bd` delete the current buffer
- `:.,+2bd` delete the current buffer and 2 buffers after it (relative to their location in the buffer list)

## 多窗口

- `:sp {filename}` 划分窗口，并打开指定文件
- `:Hexplorer` 缩写 `:He` （在下边分屏浏览目录）
- `:He!` (在上屏浏览文件目录）
- `:Vexplorer` 缩写`:Ve` （在左边分屏间浏览目录，右边为 `:Ve!`) 
- `:Texplorer` 缩写 `:Te` 使用类似于浏览器 tab 标签的形式打开文件

### 窗口间移动

- `<crtl-w>j` 光标移动到下方的窗口
- `<ctrl-w>k` 光标移动到上方的窗口
- `<ctrl-w>q` 退出窗口
- `<ctrl-w>t` 窗口在新标签页中打开

### 标签页间移动
在普通模式下，使用快捷键 `<ctrl-w>t`，可以将一个 buffer 文件在另一个标签页中打开。

- `gt` -  下一个标签
- `gT` -  前一个标签
- `{i}gt` -  `i` 数字，到指定标签页，比如 5gt 就是到第5个标签页
- `:tabs` 查看打开的窗口和 Tab 标签的情况
- `:tabn` go to next tab
- `:tabp` go to previous tab
- `:tabfirst` go to first tab
- `:tablast` go to last tab
- `:tabclose[i]` 指定标签数字，可以关闭指定标签页
- `:bufdo tab split` 把 buffer 中的文件全部转成 tab
- `vim -p file1 file2` shell 命令行中以 tab 标签页的形式打开多个文件

## 会话 session

使用命令 `:mksession ~/.mysession.vim` ( `:mks` is ok) 保存已经打开的多窗口文件。 如果文件重复，vim 默认会报错，使用 `:mksession! ~/.mysession.vim` 代替。打开保存的会话

```bash
vim -S ~/.mysession.vim
```

## Quickfix

what a quick fix list is effectively what a quick fix list is a series of entries in which point to a specific file and location.

A lot of times they’re associated with errors links or search results.

- quickfix
- location-list

### quickfix

- `:cw` 错误信息分屏显示
- `:cp` 跳到上一个错误
- `:cl` 列出所有错误
- `:cc` 显示错误详细信息
- `:cdo`

### location-list

`:ldo`

## [Power of g](https://vim.fandom.com/wiki/Power_of_g)

`:h g`

- `gQ`
- `g0`
- `g$`
- `g <ctrl-g>`
- `g#`
- `g&`
- `g-`
- `g+`
- `g??`
- `gI`
- `gU`
- `gt`
- `gT`
- `g_`
- `gf`
- `gd`
- `gg`

The global command `:g` is very useful - multiple repeats

```json
:[range]g[lobal]/{pattern}/[cmd]
```

Example:

`:normal!` `!` 

- `:g/pattern/d` – Remove lines matching pattern
- `:3,4g/pattern/d` – Remove lines matching pattern between 3 and 4 line
- `:g/pattern/y A` - Yank all lines matching ‘pattern’ into the register.
- `:g!/pattern/d` – Remove lines that do NOT match the pattern
- `:v/pattern/d` – Also removes lines that do not match the pattern
- `:cdo g/function/norm! ciw func<cr>`

## Replace

```bash
:%s/https\?.*/[&](&)/g
```

- `%` – set the range to the entire file
- `s` – substitution
- `/https\?.*/` – regex to match `http` or `https` and anything else after it
- `[&](&)`– The `&` is the magic here and inserts the matched text. In this case, the URL. The rest of the characters are interpreted literally, giving us the linked URL in the resulting markdown.
- `/g` changes all the matches on a line
- use any regex delimiter in your pattern substitution. No  need to use `/` at all, try `#` instead: `:s#/usr/local/bin#/usr/sbin#g` to avoid escaping slashes.
- Limit a search and replace operation between lines matching 2 regex patterns using `/pattern1/,/pattern2/s/search/replace/`

[Search and replace | Vim Tips Wiki | Fandom](https://www.notion.so/Search-and-replace-Vim-Tips-Wiki-Fandom-51a0f65baf324e00bbcc06f0691fd7ca)

### Repeat the last substitution

Developing efficient workflows in Vim is all about repetition, first and foremost by using `.` to repeat the last command. But Vim can also repeat your last substitution. Here’s a few options with subtle differences:

- `:&` – Repeats last substitution but resets the flags. Also works with just :s.
- `:&&` – Repeat last substitution with the same flags.
- `:%&` – Repeat last substitution on entire file, reset flags.
- `:%&&` – Repeat last substitution on entire file, keep flags.

```bash
:%s/something/newthing/g
:%&g
```

## Search

- Append `/e` to the end of a search to place the cursor at the end of the next match. I.e `/search phrase/e`
- Stay in search mode `/some-pattern<C-g>` or `/some-pattern<C-t>`


## vim 的环境配置和记录

`.viminfo` 主动记录你曾经做过的操作记录，以便你下次可以轻松地作业。

### 环境配置

1. 在一般模式下输入 `:set all` 查看所有的参数设置值。
2. `:set` 显示与系统默认值不同的设置参数，一般来说就是自定变动过的设置参数。
3. `:syntax on` 打开语法高亮

## DOS 与 Linux 的换行符

字符转换命令

- `dos2unix [-kn] file [newfile]`
- `unix2dos [-kn] file [newfile]`

## **registers**

To find out what’s stored in each register, simply use Vim’s `:registers` command, or `:reg` for short.

## Marks

Use `m{capital letter}` to make a global mark. Close and reopen VIm, and press `'{capital letter}` to open the file w/ the global mark.

## args

- `:args /path/*`
- `:wn`

[https://vimtricks.com/p/vimtrick-edit-files-sequentially/](https://vimtricks.com/p/vimtrick-edit-files-sequentially/) - ****Edit files sequentially****

## Tips

### Copying and pasting lines
- The slow way is to navigate to the line I want, yank it, go back and paste it.
- The most efficient way I can think to do that is to jump by searching with `/` and pressing `<CR>`. Then **yank** the line with `yy`. Then use the jump list, `<ctrl-o>`, to bounce back. And press `p` to paste the line below or `P` to paste the line above.
- Use the ex `:yank` command `:<line number>yank` – copies the line number specified to your default register.
- Use the ex `:copy` command `:<line number>copy.` – copies the line number specified and pastes it to the line below
- The ex `:copy` command has a short version `t`
    - `:281t.` – Copy line 281 and paste it below **the current line**
    - `:-10t.` – Copy the line 10 lines above the current line and paste it below **the current line**
    - `:+8t.` – Copy the line 8 lines after **the current line** and paste it below
    - `:10,20t.` – Copy lines 10 to 20 and paste them **below**
    - `:t20` – Copy the current line and paste it **below line 20**
- Pasting into Vim from @StackOverflow? Avoid indent fail by using set `:paste` or use the system clipboard with `"*p` 
 
    [https://vimtricks.com/p/vimtricks-avoid-paste-formatting](https://vimtricks.com/p/vimtricks-avoid-paste-formatting)

### The **shortcut** keyboards in insert mode 
- `<c-w>` - delete a word
- `<c-x><C-f>` - autocomplete filenames in vim.
- `<c-n>` - 自动提示
- `<c-p>` - 自动提示
- `<c-r>=` - From insert mode, enters Vim’s expression register
- `<c-f>` - switch from Command-Line mode to the command-line window. Or During the `/` portion of a search,  open a search history window.
- `<c-a>` or `<C-x>` - increment or decrement hex, binary, and octal numbers in normal mode.
- `<c-k>` + 2 letters - add special characters in insert mode. Examples:
    - `<c-k>oo` • bullet
    - `<c-k>Db` ◆ diamond bullet
    - `<c-k>Pd` £ pound
    - `<c-k>Eu` € euro
    - `<c-k>-N` – en dash
    - `<c-k>-M` — em

### **The undo tree** usr_32.txt
  - If you make changes, undo, then make a different change, then undo, then make a different change, you create undo branches.
  - To view the change tree, run `:undolist`, to navigate the undo branches, use `g-`, `g+`
  - Go back to an earlier text state with the `:earlier` command. 
  - Go to  newer text state with the `:later` command. This command accepts the following time units: `s` (seconds), `h` (hours), `d` (days), and `f` (number of saves).

### Change the case of characters with `~`, `u` and `U`. 
  - `gUw` - Uppercase to end of word
  - `gUiw` - Uppercase entire word
  - `guap` - Lowercase paragraph

### Sort lines in Vim:

**[sort-motion plugin](https://github.com/christoomey/vim-sort-motion)** - The primary interface to this plugin is via the `gs` mapping, for sorting based on a text object or motion. 

Examples:

- `gs2j` => Sort down two lines (current + 2 below)
- `gsip` => Sort the current paragraph
- `gsii` => Sort the current indentation level (requires [text-obj-indent plugin](https://github.com/kana/vim-textobj-indent))
- `gsi(` => Sort within parenthesis. `(b, c, a)` would become `(a, b, c)`

**Vim has some built in options:**

- `:sort` - sort all lines
- `:sort!` - sort in reverse
- `:sort u` - remove dupes and sort
- `:sort i` - ignore case
- `:sort n` - sort numerically

**There are ways to sort elements of a single line in vanilla vim as well**, as detailed in this [StackExchange response](https://vi.stackexchange.com/questions/17532/is-there-an-efficient-way-to-sort-a-selection-of-comma-separated-values-in-a-sin/17538#17538), but they will involve some regex.

### Jump between changes
- `:changes` - Show list of changes
- `g;` - Jump to previous
- `g,` - Jump to next

### `:norm` 

The command allows you to execute normal mode operations from the command line. By combining with `%` , we can run a sequence of operations on an entire file. 

- `:%norm` - Run a normal mode command on the entire file.

Examples: 

- `ysiw` - [surround plugin](https://github.com/tpope/vim-surround)
- `:%norm ysiw"A: ""`
    
### <code>`</code>character
- <code>`[</code> - Navigate to the beginning of your most recently **yanked** or **changed** text
- <code>`]</code> - Navigate to the end of your most recently **yanked** or **changed** text

### Others
1. You can edit your visual selection by using  `o` to bounce your cursor to the opposite end of the selection. Adjust the top bound as needed, then press `o` to return to the bottom.
6. Use `gv` in Vim to reselect the last visual selection
7. **[filename-modifiers](http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/cmdline.html#filename-modifiers)**。[关于Unix：在Vim中打开与当前文件相同的文件夹中的文件](https://www.codenong.com/1708623)
    
    `:p` Make file name a full path, `:h expand`, `:wildcards`
    
11. Use `ea` to append to the end of the current word.
12. Swap two characters in Vim with `xp`
13. Put from the `"%` register to put the name of the current file.
18. To make it easier to navigate conflict markers, you could tweak the built-in matchit plugin: [stackoverflow.com/a/71676129/853…](http://stackoverflow.com/a/71676129/853%E2%80%A6)
20. Multiple cursor support 
21. Open the quickfix window with `:cwin` and see the results. Next we do another search. To get back to our previous, older quickfix window, we use `:colder`. Then, we can return to the most recent search results with `:cnewer`.

## Ex Command-line

- `:set noignorecase` - make searches case sensitive (the default)
- `:set hlsearch` - highlight the remaining matches with the search highlight group.
- `:set splitright` - open splits in a right direction.
- `:set splitbelow` - open splits in a below direction.
- `:set laststatus=3` - show only one activeted single status bar
- `:edit!` - revert (go back or return to) all changes to the current buffer.
- `:1,5j` - Use the ex command `j` to join some lines on a range. Use visual selection, and J to join or 'gJ' to join without spacing
- Use `%:h` to get the path part of the current file. i.e., `cd %:h` to set the working directory to the directory of the current file.
- Use `:reg` to view the contents of all registers, or `:reg{register}` to view the contents of one.
- `:Man` command - Open that command's man page
- `:dig` - open a list of all digraphs available on your system (complication options can affect the list)
- `:reg` - open the vim registers
- **Toggle Vim boolean options**
    - adding a bang `!` at the end. `:set number!`, `:set cusorcolumn!`
    - `:set number` will turn the feature on
    - `:set nonumber` will turn the feature off
- Check the current state of any option by adding a question mark `?` to the end: `:set number?`  will return either `number` or `nonumber` depending on if the option is on or off.
- Repeat the history command
    - Enter command mode `:` and then press `<C-p>` to cycle back through your history, finding a command and invoking it again.
    - if the command was the last colon command you ran, simply press `@:` to repeat the last command.j
- Delete using the `"_d{motion}` command to delete without overwriting your default register.
- [Non-printable Characters](https://vimtricks.com/p/vimtrick-non-printable-characters/) `^M` is a single character inserted by using `CTRL-v`
followed by `CTRL-m`. [UTF-8 C1 Controls and Latin1 Supplement](https://www.w3schools.com/charsets/ref_utf_latin1_supplement.asp)
    

## Helps

- `:help wildoptions` - command-line completion allows fuzzy-matching in some cases
- `:help registers` - `"0p` will paste from the `0` register, which automatically contains the last yanked text.
- `:help global`
- `:help no-greedy` -  because `.*` is *greedy*. It matches the maximum amount of text it can. `.\{-}` will match the fewest characters possible to make a match.
- `:help jumplist` - jumps are cursor movements stored in a list called the jumplist. movements which modify the jump list are:
    - `/pattern` searches and `?pattern`searches (forward and backward pattern matching)
    - `*` and `#` (forward and backward search for the word under the cursor.
    - `%` (jump to a matching enclosing character like paren, brace, bracket, etc)
    - Any inter-file navigation like `gf`
- `:help scroll-cursor`
- `:help option-list` - all vim options
- `:help usr<tab>`
- `:help buffer`
- `:help window`
- `:help <tab>`
- `:help split`
- `:help motion`
- `:help options`
- `:help <tabcomplate or ctrl-d>`
- `:help <specific option name>`
- `:help quickfix`
- `:help macros`
- `:help motions`
- `:help substitude`

## References

- [Thoughts on coc.nvim](https://fann.im/blog/2021/08/01/thoughts-on-coc.nvim/)
- [Vim中文帮助文档](https://yianwillis.github.io/vimcdoc/doc/help.html)
- [vim-fundamentals](https://theprimeagen.github.io/vim-fundamentals/)
- [Vim documentation](http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/help.html)
- [jdhao blog about neovim](https://jdhao.github.io/categories/Nvim/)
- [amikai blog about vim](https://amikai.github.io/post/)

## Learning Vim
- `:h usr<tab>`
- `:h buffer`
- `:h window`
- `:h <tab>`
- `:h split`
- `:h motion`
- `:h options`
- `:h <tabcomplate or ctrl-d>`
- `:h <specific option name>`
- `:h quickfix`
- `:h macros`
- `:h registers`
- `:h motions`
- `:h substitude`
- `:g/^$/d` - 删除空行
- `:g/^\s*$/d` - 删除只有空格的行